Phase 0: 
Imagine we are sitting in a cafe, and hear a song, if we record the 5 seconds of it, the system must give us what the song is. 
So naive approach would be to search the whole database matching each and every beat, that would be very much expensive. 

when we search and identify the people we dont really store all the information, rather one fingerprint / DNA of a person which is unique. similarly this engine stores the characteristics of songs. Important characteristics of the song, hence its fingerprint is stored in the database. 

So our system is nothing but an audio identification system which converts songs into compact fingerprints and uses fast retrieval techniques with index based methods to retrieve the name and details of the song. 

ok basically the songs in the database and the queries both are stored in the database as fingerprints in an indexed structure and retrieves them quickly whoever is matching. 


WAV -> waveform Audio file -> contains raw audio. 
MP3 -> MPEG-1 audio layer 3 -> it reduces and compresses the file and only stores that information which is perceivable by humans in an encoded format. 

ℙ𝕙𝕒𝕤𝕖 𝟙: 
Ok now in this phase, what we do is preprocessing, here the audio file are usually WAV / MP3 files, they consist of raw stereo audio to mono audio first, as we dont need any spatial information about the song being played but the song itself. less variables less memory. and still our task is fulfilled. 

also we do the preprocessing so that all the audio files we receive are converted to numpy arrays, so that we can process them further to hash and perform fast-indexed searching. 

2. sampling rate. what is sound, it is nothing but a compression and elongation, or longitudinal wave which is a function of pressure. now we can perceive it but computers cant. so they store it as electrical signal, high noise high sound.. but soundwave is continuous, the computer or more specifically the microphone stores it as  a sample / screenshot of the wave, that is called a sample. the number of screenshots of the wave per second is the sampling rate, normally the computer sampling rate is 44.1 KHZ. so yes thats the reason we hear everything. more samples -> slower pipeline. 

Now we need to reduce the sample, how do we make sure we capture the entire information . this is where nyquiest theorem comes in, it says that to capture. 

so sampling rate >= 2f. here f is the frequency of sound. , now when we convert the file from 44.1KHz to 22.05 Khz, we cant really remove the alternate features.. proper resampling must be done, like the frequency isnt uniform, it contains both ups and downs. 

Now the last step of phase 1 is normalization and it is simply to normalize the sounds of all types of loudness. 

Faced an authentication and compatibility issue with the linux subsystem. 

𝗣͟𝗵͟𝗮͟𝘀͟𝗲 -͟𝟮 -͟> 𝗙͟𝗙͟𝗧 -͟> 𝗙͟𝗮͟𝘀͟𝘁 𝗙͟𝗼͟𝘂͟𝗿͟𝗶͟𝗲͟𝗿 𝗧͟𝗿͟𝗮͟𝗻͟𝘀͟𝗳͟𝗼͟𝗿͟𝗺͟: 
Right now the waveform we obtained from phase 1, tells us what is the shape of our wave. At some point in time, it tells us what is the amplitude of the wave. But it doesnt give the following information which specific for some audio track: 
1. Frequency beat (it doesnt tell us about which frequency is begin peaked at that moment. ) -> more specifically which frequencies are active at that moment in time. 
2. Pitch 
3. etc.

So we need these quantities. that is where FFT comes in. This is one of the most important components of DSP (Digital Signal Processing)
If we read theory we find out that fourier transform is nothing but combination of waves (typically sin waves) with varying amplitudes. hence if we apply fast fourier transform we get the components we need. and again. that gives us one while fourier transform which tells if 440Hz exists, 880 Hz exists, etc. but it doesnt tell us at what time did the 440 hz occured. so for that we need multiple fourier transform. 

Here comees SFFT -> short Fourier Transform. Instead of analyzing the whole song as a whole, we pick up tiny windows and analyze them. 
(analogy : Novel -> form 500 pages summary -> misses detail, summary for eveyr 50 pages, misses less details. )

Also inorder to not miss a single detail we perform SFFT on overlapping windows. Before applying FFT directly to the window, we multiply something called Hamming window, it apparently reduces Spectral Leakage. 

The window size we take about is 4096.. which is 4096 / 22.05k = 0.186 sec. each time we look ath this amount of audio. 

the final values which we obtain are stacked over eachotehr to create something called a Spectrogram, it contains the following info: 
1 sample : 50hz yes, 100 hz no.. 
2 sample: ...
etc. 

in the spectrogram, the intensity or loudness is showed with a color. 

Now there is something called time-frequency uncertainty tradeoff. that is if we take bigger windows we will be able to distinguish frequencies better. 

Again the overlapping frequencies we have already discussed it is to not to miss beat. 

Now there is very imp nuance ehre, when we model the waves windows, we are doing something wrong, that is we are cutting off the signals at places. so that produces a discontinuity and to transform that discontinuity or (warp), FFT introduces more frequency components which are false, this phenomenon is called spectral leakage. to handle this we use something called a hamming window. 

so instead of multiplying the waveform with a rectangular window, we multiply it with a bell shaped curve so as to reduce the discontinuity at the edge, yes that reduces teh edge info but as overlapping is present, thats okay, we dont lose much information. 

FFT assumes the analyzed segment repeats periodically. If the segment has abrupt edges, the repetition introduces discontinuities that create spectral leakage. A Hamming window gradually tapers the signal toward zero at both ends, making the repeated signal smoother and reducing leakage

now we obtain the windows and bins. then map them to the corresponding frequency, mostly this process is completely automised with scipy library, but we have to transform the amplitude to loudness as the higher amplitudes like 1000 may overwhelm smlaler ones like 100 which causes issue in hashing, so keeping the phase 3 in mind, we do this transformation.

The spectogram matrix basically stores the loudness values of all the frequencies present.. got it 

ℙ𝕙𝕒𝕤𝕖 -𝟛 -> 𝔻𝕚𝕞𝕖𝕟𝕤𝕚𝕠𝕟𝕒𝕝𝕚𝕥𝕪 ℝ𝕖𝕕𝕦𝕔𝕥𝕚𝕠𝕟: 
So at the end of phase 2 we obtained a giant spectrogram matrix which contained (2049 x 200) values 2049 because negative frequencies are just the mirror images of the positive ones hence they are not actually stored. If we store the same spectrogram for thousands of songs our databse would definetly explode. so hence we reduce its size. 

what we do is we take 2d -max pooling over the grid, the filter would be of size (20 X 20). this would highlight the maximum values and create something called a Constellation Map which is basically our fingerprint for the song. we are able to do this as most of the heatmap shows ambient noise and background music, the absolute differentiating beats are less in number. \

the peaks we get are stored in an array of tuples (f1, t1) showing their peaks. 

So we store the peaks a list of tuples.. 

Ok in scipy implementation, we iterate a diamon around the matrix, as some values are missed, scipy as morphological filters to handle the border cases like reflect, constant, neareest value, etc. 

here the neigbours are connected by manhattan distane. then we get the diamond, now after doing that we slide it and create a matrix called local max which is boolean, the center is changed to maxm and the boolean array checks if the value is equal tot eh maximum value in the neigbourhoodl. 

then we apply the filter for quiet sounds and create one more boolean matrix.. whcih tells about the quiter noises. 
Binary erosion relaxes the background mask near its boundaries, giving peaks close to the border between silence and signal a chance to survive instead of being discarded as background

we applythis binary erosion to give a chance to the border of teh background to survive the local maxima filter, it is just a cleanup process.. and not that importnatn. 
"Only classify an area as 'the background' if it is deeply, solidly quiet across the entire size of our diamond filter. If it's just a sketchy, noisy edge pixel near a sound transition, strip it away.
so we do this to leave a room of error of static buzz and static breaks. 

remember then we need to perform local & negation of the backgournd to get teh correct visualised constellation maps, and also there is some hyperparameter tuning which will be done test songs.. 

after that we obtaint he indices where the frequencies and time indices of those basically coordinates and that marks the end of phase3. 


ℙℍ𝕒𝕤𝕖 𝟜 : ℂ𝕠𝕞𝕓𝕚𝕟𝕒𝕥𝕠𝕣𝕚𝕒𝕝 ℍ𝕒𝕤𝕙𝕚𝕟𝕘.. 

Now we have a collection of peak coordinates: (time, frequency). But we can't just look up single peaks in a database. If our engine looks for a single peak at 1034 Hz, it will find millions of matches across thousands of songs. A single point isn't unique enough.

To solve this, Shazam uses Combinatorial Hashing. Instead of indexing single dots, we link pairs of dots together.

Now once we have obtained the constellatio maps, all we need to do is store them as hash.. now when we compare.. there may be audio translational invariance that a song may even start later than the original, so we use a smart tactic here, instead of storing absolute values, we store the relationship between the peaks that is the gap at which they occur. 

and also we dont choose all pairs as it leads to enormous size of n^2. so we choose a star.. (anchor frequency ) and connect the next 5 - 10 peaks aournd it. 
so we store three things achor frequency | target frequency | time gap / time dilation. 
but we also store the anchor time. 

so that star is the anchor frequency and we define a target zone of some songs around it.. and we only store those songs in our anchor frequency with time values.. 

we first convert the string to hash string.. then encode it because hsahlib handles the bytes and bits. .then what we store in the hash is the hash value and the time offset that is the time at which this anchor frequency occurs.. we will learn why in PHase 5. 


Phase 5 : Storing and database management. 

So here is the reason why store the anchor time.. what we do is once we have the stored anchor times. 

we now have the query times.. now we record the hash of the query time.. say we started the song after 20s than the original. missing 20 s. now what we get we hash 1 at 20.0, 2 at 20.5, we subtract them original hash we get -30, -30,.. so same offset all hashes agree.. hence that is the correct song.. 
now if we subtract teh database time and query time we get teh offset.. that is from which posi did the song get started ahead or behind. 

SQLlite is like a database on the disk, we just simply open the file.db and access it .. thats iut. 

so 5 concepts:
1. Database: IN our program when we create dictioinary, it runs on RAM and disappears when the program returns.. databse stays on the disk and helps us access anytime.. we can store millions of songs  without it eating up our RAM.
2. Why sqllite: Coz it is literally one file fingerprint.db, it gets accessed as sqllite.connet()
3. Table: you know just like excel: but we create two tables here: 
1. song details: id, name and artist.. 
2. song id and theirs hashes

here song id is called a foreign key as it relates two tables instead of writing the song details again and again we give it an identification like roll number.. then the first table acts as a registry. 

THe pragma foreign key checks if that key acutally exists or not.. is just a safety / sanity check. 

this is also caleld referential integrity and prevents the orphan fingerprints from existing in the database. 

we also use cascade deletion, it means if the song is deleted, delete all the songs referencing it. 

cursor is like a mediator just like mysql language, cursor creats queries and talks to the database. 

now after storing, we need fast searching for that we use B-tree, unlike a binary tgree which stores one key per node, B-tree stores multiple keys at every node. reducing vast complexity and establishes its suitability to disks. \

we index the hash here to search the song in the database.

cursor.execute(
    "CREATE INDEX IF NOT EXISTS idx_hash ON fingerprints(hash);"
)
this line basicalyl tells to build the B-tree on the hashes for fast lookup. 
one more thing we implement is atomic transaction which states that if any song fails in loading fingerpirnt, remove the entire song.. bvecause half info is worse than no info. 

Phase-6 : Recognition: 
Once we have eveyrthing ready, we process the query song into the preprocess layer. then what we find is not number of hashes but the list of hashes that makes more sense, if any one of the matches has more offsets same.. then that song wins.

SO we first convert the query music into hashes by processing thro the same pipeline. then we use the default dict and for each song we store the offset (database - query). then by majority voting, we get the song which actually mathces. 

